We will see that ultimately, the development of the brain, in this dynamic,
will guide and organize all these phenomena of
intracranial membranes,
and which will support and allow the creation of this reciprocal tension membrane system
in which
all vessels, or at least important vessels, will pass through, in terms of...
important vessels in terms of...
venous, to drain
and release
this CO2,
these things that need to
be removed in a very specific way,
and that quite a few problems
actually come from stasis,
with key points that we will study,
among others, at the level of certain confluences,
such as the
pterygoids or
certain venous sinuses,
transverse to the
occipital plane,
where we have almost eight layers
meeting
at that level.
It's truly a meeting point,
a crossroads,
important.
And also the base of the skull.
We can say that this craniosacral mechanism
is
important in the sense that
it is one of our
references that we can always rely on.
Can I have a good craniosternal-sacral mechanism?
Do I have a good cranio-sternal-sacral mechanism?
Cranio-sternal-sacral-mandibular,
from an age when the child straightens up.
The moment the child starts teething,
the child starts to straighten up.
Teeth are posture sensors.
You're going to understand something in your head now,
what I'm going to tell you will make sense.
The importance of teeth as supports.
your posture. They are truly
supports for you to breathe
correctly, in fact.
The tongue is very important
too. At first,
we look, you see,
children are like this.
They look for the tongue, it's very
important. Then, the teeth arrive,
and when they start to have points of
support, with teeth above and below,
the child straightens up.
Okay? And now, you
will understand, look, before,
the old people, when they had no teeth left,
how were they, the old people?
The teeth, the teeth, they will say...
You give them teeth now,
they straighten up. All these people,
all these elderly people have teeth,
have dentures.
They have points of support to breathe.
You ask an old man
who has no teeth left, you tell him, come on, straighten up.
He doesn't know how to breathe.
He can't smile anymore.
He looks for points of support for
breathing with his posture, so the teeth become sensors for
the child's straightening
and for straightening your posture. It's very important. It's
also very important not
to have a missing tooth on one side. Why do you have a tooth? We remove it. You have one on
the
side that was removed. Why? It's very important. If you have a missing tooth, your tongue,
since it does,
it moves to the side.
So it slightly
opens its space to the tongue,
because it's great, the tongue is
magnificent for many things,
it goes over to the side.
Here, it comes
to fill the hole
to make you swallow.
And in fact,
since the tongue is part of the lingual axis,
it is part of your
longitudinal axis, what we call
the axis of the
embryonic chain.
This is the first axis, it's your embryonic chain that ends at your thumbs and big toes, it's
your embryonic chain that organizes itself like that.
And so you will seek, through your tongue, through your posture, through your teeth, to maintain
your balance.
And the eye, finally, will seek its stability in relation to your vestibular system,
with an orientation of 23 degrees like this, an orientation of 23 degrees like that.
Initially, the inner ear is oriented like this, like
this.
And then, through growth, you come back here.
That's why children used to get a lot of ear infections.
Especially if the child is yelled at too much at home.
Observe, children with ear infections are children who are yelled at at home.
The first thing I say is, you need to calm down a bit, ma'am.
No, but I say, maybe we should speak a little softer.
it's a water protection that we're going to put. And at the same time, it tries to horizontalize
at some point. When it straightens up, it horizontalizes, it reaches an angulation, which is
an angulation
that will find the same angulation at the heart level, the same angulation as the angulation
of the Earth. You orient yourself in relation to your universe on your angular planes. You
seek
stability. The body is always a little forward too. If you look, there's
always a
certain degree or it's like this.
In fact, if you look at someone, you'll see that in relation to their axis, they have a tilt.
tendency that I know, you swallow up to 1 or 2 liters a day, you take 25,000 breaths
a day, your heart beats 100,000 times a day, that's a digestive rhythm, that's a
respiratory rhythm, that's a cardiac rhythm, you see, in fact what we're going to
do is
position ourselves in our different rhythms, cardiac rhythm, my digestive rhythm
which is
really good. It's also related
to
hearing.
Because
the diverticula, that will be next time,
it's Meckel's cartilage
which continues with the inner ear.
You have the styloid process which continues
with the inner ear system.
I'll explain that in detail next time.
We'll see how
we can bring that back into its median line
and how we can clear the system again.
It's done like that. It's embryology.
It's a study of the face.
Already, these two magical bones, the sphenoid and the occiput,
we will see that they are completely subject to this craniosacral mechanism.
It's schematic, but it still shows us, you see,
look what will happen simply in a flexion and extension at the level of the teeth.
Look, there are people who completely wear down the anterior part,
people who completely wear down the posterior part.
and the coronal structure.
zone here to have freedom here. That means if it's not free here, you can sometimes
have
just a small tooth. We can manipulate a tooth. I
have a friend, he manages to free up an area here.
Simply a small tooth from your structure
here. No, no, no. The bone is built in the
membrane. That's what I drew here.
It's the brain, as I tried to explain to you, which is the engine for development, it's what pushes.
But around, in the creation of my neural tube, we saw that there was a mesodermal tissue
that appeared.
And I said, well, at first, if we look, it's all mesoderm.
All mesoderm.
Only, this mesoderm will densify.
A part that will be very close to the brain will be the dura mater.
visceral dura mater, then it will become the parietal dura mater, and above,
it's bone from the mesoderm, initially, which actually undergoes
metabolic fields of growth and expansion,
and begins to harden all around, to form what we will call the vault,
but I will explain that again.
So initially, it's the same tissue. That's why when we do a perception of the skull,
we can...
We can easily pass through these structures because it's the same fluid,
it's the same frequency in fact, which is slightly modified in alpha, beta and
theta.
It's an image.
The question is that the bone is the result of the
system.
That's what I want to explain. The bone is the finality of the process.
At some point.
process of ascensus, so of cerebralization. I have a brain like this, and
then at some
point we see that this brain grows very, very strongly, it does this, and
it pulls upwards.
And we will see that this will lead to a rapprochement on the median line of
all structures,
but at the same time an iteration from here and from here. So it's this ascending force
and descending force that
brings the lateral material
towards the center.
But in this movement,
you will see that the primitive digestive tube
which is oriented like this
will have an upward movement
like this.
It's like that.
And there, growth happens.
And it does this.
And it is in this process
that the tongue
follows its developmental force.
That's why we say that the depth
of the tongue, it represents
a reflection of the depth
of cerebralization.
Ah, it's a symmetry.
We see that this base of the skull
really becomes a point of convergence,
a meeting point of information,
whether it is first
purely bony,
with the hypophyseal cartilages
and paracordal,
whether it is already on the
endodermal
and ectodermal planes linked to the clear.
pituitary gland, and then all the
tension membranes
of the brain, and we will even see
that we can even add
that the lines
in relation to the bronchial
trees also come
to insert on this lower part of the skull base.
It's truly a point
of incredible information convergence,
where we see, even on a
hypothalamic-pituitary plane already,
via
the
supraoptic or paraoptic nuclei,
you see, of the information
of the chemistry of body tone,
of all the information,
so acid-base, of all the information,
you have a roof,
the roof of the pituitary gland,
which is a vascular roof,
it's filled with small vessels,
there, you see, that these primitive
dural sheaths orient
and organize themselves on this axis,
that's where we realize,
you see, how Béchamp, Béchamp
drew these lines of force that meet towards this base of the skull, we see
the orientation of these things very well,
with a very important confluence on a V2 plane that will be found at the level
of the union.
Meeting of forces, meeting of important moments.
We see another way of looking at these images, where we see the falx
cerebri, the dural sheaths and the bone that will be built.
but which are initially formed from a common tissue.
It's simply the development, the great engine for all this is who?
Especially the development of the brain, it is what organizes this.
The growth of this brain, this process of cephalization, is what
organizes all this.
That's why my reference point that I started yesterday, I told you, okay, we're going to start with this process
of brain development, very simple.
And there, I'm busy adding a lot
of elements around. Well, the whole ventricular system, oh yes, all the tension membranes, oh yes, all the dural sheaths, oh yes, all the bone, ultimately, is built around. The only thing to remember, for now, is the tai chi of the brain.
The only thing to remember, for now,
is the tai chi of the brain.
And in the tai chi of the brain, you can
add, ah, I can, okay, we'll
do that together. I'm here,
I have the tai chi, we do the forward movement,
I have the telencephalization movement. We remember
it does this and it does this. Internally, what do I have? Okay, I can draw
my ventricles.
I have the image of my ventricles in this movement. Okay, outside, I do this, I
do this,
now, hop, I have my whole membrane, I have my falx cerebri being built.
Ah, behind, you remember, there was a pontine that was forming behind,
it formed the tentorium cerebelli. I'm going to go in the
movement like this.
It's a developing brain.
with these sheaths that will reverberate here.
We can clearly see, you see, how everything organizes itself,
we can clearly see here the lines of force,
these dural sheaths inside, you see,
it's right here that it.
It's the importance, you see, of this dura mater,
the spinal cord that is here, the green one,
and we can clearly see here, look,
I take the pia mater which is really here,
I take the space.
the arachnoid, and we see
here the dura mater
internal, you see, that it has
and then the dura mater
external which is part
of the densification.
In fact, we can trace it everywhere.
So, you also have one thing
that will be important, is that
when we study
the development on the plane
of a nerve,
you see, in fact, there is a kind
of continuity, we could say
symbolic for now, which has a kind
of continuity between
my external dura mater
and internal, if you want here,
my arachnoid and my pia mater
on the section here where I will have the epineurium
which would be the epineurium
here external
external dura mater, internal dura mater,
it's a kind of continuity,
the perineurium here,
you see, which would be in relation
with the
and the endoneurium which will be in relation to the continuity at the level of the
pia mater.
But that's a question mark.
However, what is really important to realize
are these small vessels that are found,
which are mesodermal vessels in the endoneurium, here among others,
and that it is these small blood capillaries,
which can actually cause stasis.
They are the ones that bother us.
That's why by working on the pumping,
By working on the releases, that's how we decongest radicular problems.
Because you have what is called here, if I go a little further,
with Hoffman's ligaments and Forestier's operculum.
Whatever there is in itself, it's something that develops here
and creates a kind of small valve.
In fact, it continues with this dura mater as well,
which creates a kind of protective valve.
it's actually the whole dural system, you see, and that's important for
forming the Corlings,
the craniosacral dural sleeve, but in fact the
craniosacral vertebral dural sleeve,
and in theory it would almost be a craniosacral vertebro-peripheral sleeve,
meaning that the entire dural axis, not only
is it insertive,
here before we thought it was floating a bit
and then we realized it wasn't
and in fact it's even supported by systems
dural and even by opercula
which is important, we call
Forestier's opercula which hold a valve
which maintain, which allow a balance
of fluid
a fluid balance in the sense
that there is no phase of congestion
if you have congestion it's bad
at the level of your
nerve terraces, it's a protection
the vault
in relation to that, you see, that's already
a densification, but there's still an area
here, you see.
So look closely here, you see, we see
all these membranes there,
well, that's one, in fact,
it's still sheaths,
you see, we see it here,
these are the different metabolic fields
of densification, of distension that participate
in the synchondrosis of the skull base,
but what is important there
at the level of the road, it's the detraction
that will form
the bones in the direction of the displacements
that we see here, you see, with the displacements
of the trabeculae and osteoblasts
that will form the bone plates,
frontal, you see,
and we will see the ossification nuclei
that form at their periphery, here on the side
and here, you see.
I'm making an image
of a brain
which is in the phase
of development like here, you see,
an encephalon,
with, we had seen,
First, we're going to go back here and imagine that
there are these dural sheaths around, you see, and these dural sheaths, they make a kind of windows
like this, you see, I have a window, then I have another window here, then
I have another window like that, you see, I would have another one here, like
that.
So, you will almost be able to tell me in the...
chronology of appearance
of the densification of the skull bones
simply by following the brain
as it develops. We will first have
the frontal bone
that will densify.
It, behind,
it will be the parietal.
Then the occipital,
upper part,
because it's not part of the base, it's different.
And to come, the upper part
at the temporal level.
And in fact, I simply have, in this phase,
The force of development, very precise, of
the development of my brain.
First, you have the bone that was here, which was first membranous,
will, through this process of metabolic change, create
a bone that will become hard.
But there are certain windows here, you see, here.
windows that remain, which were linked to
these bands, which are there, like this, and there,
like this,
here. It is in this area that the ossification will occur from
the center, these are
membranous centers. It will ossify the bone here, then it will ossify the parietal bone.
then the occipital
and then the frontal system.
It only follows
the development
of cephalization.
It's the same process.
So from the inside to the periphery,
I can say that I will have
inside the ventricular system,
outside the dural
system with all the compartmentalization,
and completely outside, the result
will be the establishment of the...
of the...
of the parietal, of the upper occipital, and of the upper part
at the temporal level.
And in fact, if we look, these dural sheaths, we find them here, simply
as bands of
lines of force here. Which main dural sheaths will I have here? It's my
falx cerebri.
A form of dural sheaths, in fact, very anterior. And there, we can clearly see the windows,
you see.
The frontal window, the parietal window and the occipital
window.
And what is this here?
It will perhaps be the sutures.
The future sutures.
And there, we see that initially, we can clearly see here
the fontanelles which are simply movements.
And we see the whole movement here, like this, that happens.
there are two important phenomena
it's the piezoelectric phenomenon
these forces like this will fold at the level of the face
at the level of the teeth and at the level of things
these are things that will penetrate deeply into the tissue
we'll talk about it in the face
however one important thing is
that the endocranial cortex
they will mainly undergo
effects from cerebral expansion.
meningeal aponeurosis, while the exocranial cortices
mainly undergo those
of the cervical muscles, so of the cephalic and mandibular posture, that is to say
of the entire lingual and masticatory mass.
So what happens is that the endocranial cortex, it will undergo, it's
it that undergoes all the internal movement coming from the inside
to the outside.
But at some point, when the fetus, at some point, it
starts to move.
It already starts sucking, very early in fact, that is to say around 5
-6 months, we really see that it moves clearly and distinctly, you see.
And in fact, at that moment, it's the exocranial cortex, why?
Because it's the muscles, you see, behind that start to pull.
So at the very beginning, when you look at a skull, you...
We see here that of a fetus that is 3-4 months old, the difference here is
that it's mostly the brain that grows and makes the movement, you see, like that.
But now, the posterior lengthening, at the beginning of the fetal period, where the
muscles are not very active, the cerebral expansion is particularly dynamic,
the cranial box is spherical, you see, quite spherical, whereas at the
end of the fetal period, that is to say the beginning of the 7th month,
From the found boat until birth, the cervical and facial muscles become active
and the skull takes on a much more transverse and elongated shape.
It's a therapeutic key to show us that there is now a balance between an external force
and an internal force in relation to the system.
And that means that when we have children with plagiocephaly, for example, we must also be attentive
to the external force, that is to say to the positioning, that is to say to...
rework these cervical muscles,
to put them back into a dynamic and not just do
cranial work, which was
precisely a big problem for
osteopaths who hadn't understood this level
and who only did cranial work.
We said no, it will get better. But no, it won't
get better at all. The whole angle
of class 1, class 2, class 3
which will already be expressed with
the sphenoidal angle and the angles of the petrous bones
to show
the straightening of the
cephalic curvature, which makes it what gives us a retrognathic, prognathic or orthognathic jaw.
which will give us a retrognathic, prognathic or orthognathic jaw.
We can clearly see, 28 months, it really starts to lengthen towards the
posterior and the posterior.
This is the importance of this external activity.
Different windows, initially it's rather spherical,
and at the end it will be much more transverse.
It's a kind of continuity.
A kind of continuity, you imagine all this drainage here is completely in continuity
with all the vertebral drainage, from the small pelvis up to here.
That's why prostate cancers, etc.,
or other uterine cancers in women, can lead to cerebral cancers, this
continuity that occurs, there are vascular continuities, that's quite interesting.
That's quite interesting.
to study when studying the vascular system in detail.
We have a therapeutic key which is still this sinus here,
congestion at the level of this relationship on
the inferior part of the sphenoid
at the level of my pterygoids, where there is venous congestion
venous
which is very strongly linked to all the tension membranes,
to all the mandibular balance, whether lingual or temporal.
or purely maxillary,
which will reverberate there.
Someone who comes with acute torticollis,
it's a stasis.
He's stuck in his thing.
There's a contraction, you have to release the stasis.
I, for example, work on this point,
to release, decongest
the system, same thing,
down to the small pelvis.
It allows to clear
since there is a continuity throughout the sinus.
When we have acute lumbago,
when we have things like that, we also need to take
The vault is essentially of membranous origin, while the
base is essentially of cartilaginous origin,
with the occipital which, for the upper part, is membranous,
while the basioccipital part is cartilaginous.
We had already seen it in the first field of construction, which is the great
wing of the sphenoid, which is rather of membranous origin.
The frontal bone, except for the spines, and the parietals are membranous, while all the rest, a
large part, practically the entire temporal, the ethmoid, sphenoid,
and the frontal spine are of cartilaginous origin.
The movement of the metabolic field is different.
The part that is of membranous origin
with the part that is of cartilaginous origin.
Yes.
Initially, it's the same tissue, but it follows different metabolic fields.
One in detraction, the other in compression.
Between touch, balance, taste, smell, hearing and vision,
we see that smell, in fact, appears very, very early,
the one that wins with touch.
Touch and smell are very early in our capacity for intervention.
thanks to the information.
The great wings to the sphenoidal spirit,
it's only at 22 years old, really, that it starts.
But in fact, if we look, you see,
look, it ends quite late.
We start ossifying until 81 years old.
In 81 years, you don't move many things anymore.
It's already good...
You see, in fact, it's noted as late synostosis
of the occipitotemporal structures as a whole, for example.
After birth, growth and maturity are still very important.
Why? Because after birth, we observe, for example, that the brain still has a volumetric growth
volumetric
that doubles between birth and six months.
So the brain will still grow, so the endocranial cortex will still undergo modifications
up to the exocranial cortex, via the information it still receives from the endo,
will double between birth and the brain.
six months. That means that
all plagiocephaly must be treated
before six months.
That's what you have to tell yourself.
At first, you see them, everything is fine, and then suddenly,
well, for me, it doesn't look good at all.
Osteopathy work, we do active work
from what is a mandibular
cranial, or
membrane release,
the work of all these endocranial membranes,
but also
of everything that is visceral, etc.
since everything will be linked, because there,
we can go a little further,
it synchronizes with the visceral system
on the membranous planes.
The falx cerebri will be in relation
with the development of the falx cerebri.
The mesoduodenum will be in the same relation
as the tentorium cerebelli
and the mesosigmoid will be
in the same movement as the development
of the falx cerebelli.
At six months,
the mastication will already be a bit hard,
indeed the thickening of the dermis, the molarization, the
mastication which will be more
important, which will somewhat camouflage the thing, but there may still be poorly expressed densities. Classically, there is no longer any increase in cerebral growth
after five years. The slight increase in perimeter, it's
it's
diploization, pneumatization, increase in volume, thickening of the podermis, pneumatization.
It's important. Around 3-4 years old, you have the maxillary sinus
that needs to open.
It happens at the same time as the adrenal functions become completely active.
It makes children, what we call snotty little kids.
Their nose is running all the time.
And in fact, they are hyper-rectal under the pelvis.
People who come now, who are 30, 40 years old, who have recurrent sinusitis...
recurrent sinusitis,
you have to go see what happened sometimes at that age.
You see?
That's how I do it, I come, I look,
and then I ask the question,
is there something unresolved?
Are we going to go there?
Well, maybe I went through an event where I was blocked.
We're going to try to see the memory that's there.
Maybe to do it.
If there was a trauma that was not expressed,
it continued to express itself.
Then around 7 years old, you have the function of the frontal sinuses.
at the same time as the thyroid space.
That's where I say, around 7 years old,
we start to stand up for ourselves.
Before that, we're fighting,
and then at some point, no, now,
I'm starting to have reason.
I can speak, I can confront the other, through my words,
because I'm starting to have the words
that are given and electrified, if you will.
And then, around 10-12 years old,
you have the pituitary function that appears
at the same time as the sphenoid and mastoid sinuses.
Sphenoid, right, your balls, and mastoid.
And that's a moment when, well, you'll understand, it's the brain falling into
the testicles.
You start thinking with your dick all the time.
That's where you have to go see what's happening in the sphenoid sinuses, in the mastoid sinusitis.
You find at that level, you have people who remain blocked there.
We realized that since the 80s, we started putting children,
at least in Belgium, I think in France too, we put all children on their backs.
Why? Because they sleep less well.
And in fact, there's less risk, supposedly, of suffocation.
However, we observed at first a huge increase in
plagiocephaly.
That is to say, the children were always lying on one side,
and in fact, you see, the plagiocephaly here,
and in fact the child is like a bowling ball.
of a hive, since the skull will double in volume,
we will develop where we can.
This is a position
where you see intra-uterine, where the child,
we already see that he is
quite twisted.
If he stays like that until the end, it's a descent.
We almost see the image, but in the other
direction. It's a child who is already in a low
position at the uterine level.
the child should be placed
in this position.
Normally, logically, it's an occiput-anterior
presentation.
Occipitopubic, which is a large majority, but there can be fundus-pubic,
but in the occipitopubic representation, when we make the movement,
it's the uterus, and it's all that guides the mess,
there are stages that we must respect.
So what also happens, we have a study that has now shown that in the acquisition of information,
of the progression of the child's psychomotor approach,
since we put children on their backs,
they have actually created a faster development
of the hands, you see.
When do the first teeth appear?
Nine months.
Between seven, six, seven, eight, nine months.
The child starts to straighten up there.
That's the ideal.
These first steps are really important.
That the child can roll over by himself, and especially this position, this
passage, and then he will have this position, and very often we go from
there to there.